README.md, before:

![guglielmo](/images/guglielmo.png)
# Guglielmo

Guglielmo implements a simple FM and DAB receiver based on Qt and the Qt-dab and sdr-j-fm packages.

The primary reason it is being developed is there is a lack of media centre quality Open Source
Software Defined Radios: most of the packages out there focus more on hobbyist features,
such as signal and content monitoring, leaving out media features like a volume slider or MPRIS control.

Yes, I have blown the ribbon tweeter fuses on my maggies because my previous go to SDR DAB receiver
started at full blast, and I run my media centre headless: I don't really want to scramble for a _VNC_
session when I want to stop the music, when I could simply use _KDE connect_ on my phone.

There is also a distinct lack of FM SDR receivers, which is disappointing, since, at least in the UK,
for reasons of cost, most stations transmit at a fairly poor bitRate, if not downright in mono, and
FM stations seem to still be a better proposition in terms of sound quality.

## Usage

The main window is divided in two: the right side changes depending on the mode, DAB or FM, the left
side being common to both.

### DAB

![DAB screen](/images/dab.png)

In DAB mode, top to bottom, there's the channel name, a list of all the services (AKA stations) in
the current channel, a channel selector, and the previous and next buttons.

Previous and next switch to the previous or next service, if there's a previous or next service to
select, or the previous or next channel if already at either end of the service list.

Or you can switch service or channel using the appropriate selectors.

### FM

![FM screen](/images/fm.png)

FM mode sports a frequency display, and a large, old style, frequency knob.

Turn it either way to select the frequency.

The knob turns several times, much like in the analog days of old.

Below there's a scan down, scan up and stop scan buttons, which can be used to find the previous or
next FM station.

### Presets

![presets](/images/presets.png)

The preset controls are at the bottom of the right widget.

The central selector is used to choose the next preset.

Provided that there's a DAB service selected, or in FM mode, M+ adds the current service or frequency
to the presets, whileM- removes the current station from the presets, if it had been previously added.

### Left widget

On the top left, find the stereo, signal strength and signal quality indicators.

Green is good, red is bad, and blank, no station is playing.

Below, find the DAB or FM station name, and whatever text the station is currently choosing to display.

On the bottom you have the volume and squelch knobs, the DAB and FM buttons, and the play/stop and
record/stop recording buttons.

The squelch is a control that silences the sound when the signal is poor.

The higher the value, the better the signal quality has to be for any sound to be played.
It's only active in FM mode.

### Settings

The burger menu button at the top right activates the about and settings windows.

![settings screen](/images/settings.png)

Currently there are 4 tabs, controlling

- the UI interface 
- the sound output
- FM settings
- device settings

There's no tweakable DAB settings on offer.

#### UI

The actual themes depend on the platform and the build.

#### Sound

Choose the sound plugin (Qt or Portaudio), and in case of PortAudio, the output port.

#### FM

This controls some of the FM settings, most notably

- the FM decoder
- the de-emphasis filter (use 50µs unless you are in the US)
- the parameters for the low pass filter

#### Device

This tab offers a combo box selecting any of the available devices, and for each of the devices

- Automatic Gain Control
- Device gain
- LNA gain (if the device is equipped with a low noise amplifier)

The gains range from 0 to 100 and are remapped internally to suit each device.
The defaults are mid range.

Note that when AGC is selected, any change to the IF gain will only take place after AGC is turned off.

## Building

The executable is created either with qmake or cmake.

Using qmake, modify guglielmo.pro and comment out the devices you don't wish to include in the build.

Run qmake (or qmake-qt5, depending on the qt5 installation), then make, and you'll find the executable in
the bin directory appropriate for your port (eg linux-bin).

For cmake:

	mkdir build
	cd build
	cmake .. -DXXX=ON -DYYY=ON ... -DZZZ=ON
	make

where XXX, YYY and ZZZ are the mnemonics for the devices to include.

At this moment in time, the only device tested is the SDR RTL stick, and the only build linux.

## TODO

- integrate Qt audio with pulseaudio
- improve on volume management
- RDS is very signal sensitive at moment
- debug support
- MPRIS support
- cleanup the source, remove objects that are not needed, consolidate buffer usage
- make loading settings more resilient to duff values

## Acknowledgements, copyright, etc...

The backends have wholesale lifted from Qt-dab and Sdr-j-fm by Jan van Katwijk and
various other contributors.

I have merely integrated the two processors and adapted the devices to work against
the guglielmo interface.

The few icons not included in the Qt default style have been taken from freesvg.org.

My understanding is that they are in the public domain.

The guglielmo icon has been created by myself starting from public domain Guglielmo
Marconi facing left portrait dated 1908.

As with the rest of this package, you are free to use it within the limits of the GPL v2
license - just make sure that you acknowledge my original work wherever you use it.

Commit message:

volume control and RDS quality

README.md, after:

![guglielmo](/images/guglielmo.png)
# Guglielmo

Guglielmo implements a simple FM and DAB receiver based on Qt and the Qt-dab and sdr-j-fm packages.

The primary reason it is being developed is there is a lack of media centre quality Open Source
Software Defined Radios: most of the packages out there focus more on hobbyist features,
such as signal and content monitoring, leaving out media features like a volume slider or MPRIS control.

Yes, I have blown the ribbon tweeter fuses on my maggies because my previous go to SDR DAB receiver
started at full blast, and I run my media centre headless: I don't really want to scramble for a _VNC_
session when I want to stop the music, when I could simply use _KDE connect_ on my phone.

There is also a distinct lack of FM SDR receivers, which is disappointing, since, at least in the UK,
for reasons of cost, most stations transmit at a fairly poor bitRate, if not downright in mono, and
FM stations seem to still be a better proposition in terms of sound quality.

## Usage

The main window is divided in two: the right side changes depending on the mode, DAB or FM, the left
side being common to both.

### DAB

![DAB screen](/images/dab.png)

In DAB mode, top to bottom, there's the channel name, a list of all the services (AKA stations) in
the current channel, a channel selector, and the previous and next buttons.

Previous and next switch to the previous or next service, if there's a previous or next service to
select, or the previous or next channel if already at either end of the service list.

Or you can switch service or channel using the appropriate selectors.

### FM

![FM screen](/images/fm.png)

FM mode sports a frequency display, and a large, old style, frequency knob.

Turn it either way to select the frequency.

The knob turns several times, much like in the analog days of old.

Below there's a scan down, scan up and stop scan buttons, which can be used to find the previous or
next FM station.

### Presets

![presets](/images/presets.png)

The preset controls are at the bottom of the right widget.

The central selector is used to choose the next preset.

Provided that there's a DAB service selected, or in FM mode, M+ adds the current service or frequency
to the presets, whileM- removes the current station from the presets, if it had been previously added.

### Left widget

On the top left, find the stereo, signal strength and signal quality indicators.

Green is good, red is bad, and blank, no station is playing.

Below, find the DAB or FM station name, and whatever text the station is currently choosing to display.

On the bottom you have the volume and squelch knobs, the DAB and FM buttons, and the play/stop and
record/stop recording buttons.

The squelch is a control that silences the sound when the signal is poor.

The higher the value, the better the signal quality has to be for any sound to be played.
It's only active in FM mode.

### Settings

The burger menu button at the top right activates the about and settings windows.

![settings screen](/images/settings.png)

Currently there are 4 tabs, controlling

- the UI interface 
- the sound output
- FM settings
- device settings

There's no tweakable DAB settings on offer.

#### UI

The actual themes depend on the platform and the build.

#### Sound

Choose the sound plugin (Qt or Portaudio), and in case of PortAudio, the output port.

#### FM

This controls some of the FM settings, most notably

- the FM decoder
- the de-emphasis filter (use 50µs unless you are in the US)
- the parameters for the low pass filter

#### Device

This tab offers a combo box selecting any of the available devices, and for each of the devices

- Automatic Gain Control
- Device gain
- LNA gain (if the device is equipped with a low noise amplifier)

The gains range from 0 to 100 and are remapped internally to suit each device.
The defaults are mid range.

Note that when AGC is selected, any change to the IF gain will only take place after AGC is turned off.

## Building

The executable is created either with qmake or cmake.

Using qmake, modify guglielmo.pro and comment out the devices you don't wish to include in the build.

Run qmake (or qmake-qt5, depending on the qt5 installation), then make, and you'll find the executable in
the bin directory appropriate for your port (eg linux-bin).

For cmake:

	mkdir build
	cd build
	cmake .. -DXXX=ON -DYYY=ON ... -DZZZ=ON
	make

where XXX, YYY and ZZZ are the mnemonics for the devices to include.

At this moment in time, the only device tested is the SDR RTL stick, and the only build linux.

## TODO

- integrate Qt audio with pulseaudio
- RDS is very signal sensitive at moment
- debug support
- MPRIS support
- cleanup the source, remove objects that are not needed, consolidate buffer usage
- make loading settings more resilient to duff values

## Acknowledgements, copyright, etc...

The backends have wholesale lifted from Qt-dab and Sdr-j-fm by Jan van Katwijk and
various other contributors.

I have merely integrated the two processors, adapted the devices to work against the
guglielmo interface, fixed a few bugs and improved a few things.

The few icons not included in the Qt default style have been taken from freesvg.org.

My understanding is that they are in the public domain.

The guglielmo icon has been created by myself starting from public domain Guglielmo
Marconi facing left portrait dated 1908.

As with the rest of this package, you are free to use it within the limits of the GPL v2
license - just make sure that you acknowledge my original work wherever you use it.
